Question: What is your understanding of the experiment the team is replicating?
What question does it answer? How clear is the team's explanation?

I have a clear understanding of the experiment. The team is analyzed different
methods of mitigaton for COIVD-19.

Methodology: Do you understand the methodology? Does it make sense for the
question? Are there limitations you see that the team did not address?

The methodology does a good job of explaining how they are going to answer the
question posed in the abstract.

Results: Do you understand what the results are (not yet considering their
interpretation)? If they are presented graphically, are the visualizations
effective? Do all figures have labels on the axes and captions?

The graphs don't have axis titles or an overall title, but they did label it in
a caption underneath it is still a little difficult to understand.

Interpretation: Does the draft report interpret the results as an answer to the
motivating question? Does the argument hold water?

While it does explain results, it does not reference any of the graphs.

Replication: Are the results in the report consistent with the results from the
original paper? If so, how did the authors demonstrate that consistency? Is it
quantitative or qualitative?

Yes, the replication appears to have the exponential fit they were expecting.

Extension: Does the report explain an extension to the original experiment
clearly? Can it answer an interesting question that the original experiment did
not answer?

Yes, it is clearly explained.

Progress: Is the team roughly where they should be at this point, with a
replication that is substantially complete and an extension that is clearly
defined and either complete or nearly so?

I believe so. I think some more work has to be done with the replication graphs,
but overall they are in a good place.

Presentation: Is the report written in clear, concise, correct language? Is it
consistent with the audience and goals of the report? Does it violate any of the
recommendations in my style guide Links to an external site.?

There are some grammatical errors, and I think some explainations could be
better.

Mechanics: Is the report in the right directory with the right file name? Is it
formatted professionally in Markdown? Does it include a meaningful title and the
full names of the authors? Is the bibliography in an acceptable style?

Yes it is.
